So, let's talk more about creating
and implementing interfaces in Java.
So, in the Java programming language,
an interface is one of the three reference types supported,
along with class and enum.
An interface can contain the following elements.
All members are implicitly public and cannot be declared
with any other access modifier, unless specified below.
So, fields, all variables
are public static final implicitly,
method signatures, default methods,
permitted as of Java 8,
methods declared with the default modifier.
Static methods permitted as of Java 8.
Private methods permitted as of Java 9.
Both static and non-static concrete methods can be private.
Nested types.
And, method bodies exist only for default,
private, and static methods.
An interface that declares one and only one abstract method
is called a functional interface.
So, the following table will hopefully
help you quickly see the differences
between classes and interfaces.
Inheritance, class can extend only one class and interface.
A class can implement multiple interfaces.
And, an interface can extend multiple interfaces.
Default access modifier,
no modifiers for members and elements.
Class, package-private implicitly cannot declare.
Interface, public implicitly and it's redundant to declare.
Support for other modifiers.
For class, public, protected, private.
Interface, concrete methods must be declared
with one set of the following modifiers,
static, private static, private, default.
Abstract type support.
Class, you could declare a class
with abstract modifier explicitly abstract.
And, interface, always abstract, implicitly abstract.
Support for state.
Class, instance and class fields are supported
and objects can be instantiated which have their own state.
Interface, no support for state except global constants,
public, static, final.
An interface is never instantiated.
And finally, support for the default modifier, class, none.
Interface, permitted for public concrete methods only.
So, as a minimum, an interface is declared as follows.
You see the example there, interface, AnInterface,
and left or right curly braces.
And, an interface can only be public or package-private.
An interface can extend one or more other interfaces
and it does not implement interfaces or extend classes.
So, the example there, public interface TestInterface
extends comparable, comma, AnInterface,
then left and right curly braces.
So, let's start now by creating a new project
called Interfaces, which I've already done.
Then, you wanna create a new class here
called InterfaceTest.
So, this code's demonstrating that declaration
of a package-private interface, that's the first one there.
InterfaceExample being the name.
And, you can see I've got a total
of seven fields declared for this interface
and that they've all got different sets of modifiers.
Then, moving on down,
we've got a class there, InterfaceTest.
This tests the veracity of the statement
that regardless of how you define a field on an interface,
they will always be public, static, and final.
So, let's run this.
So, there's the output, all fields on an interface
are public static final.
So, moving on, we're gonna define some concrete methods
and then add those methods to the interface.
Firstly, you can see we've got two private methods there.
One static, one not.
We've got one default method there,
which is implicitly public,
which actually calls the non-static privateMethod.
And, scrolling on down,
we've got one static method there
and that's implicitly public
and that one's actually calling this static private method.
And, what we need to do then,
we need to implement our interface,
so let's do that for our InterfaceTest class.
Implements InterfaceExample.
Now that we've done that, we're gonna add some code
right down to the bottom of the main method.
So, this code executes the two non-private concrete methods.
One through a static reference
and one through an instance of an object
that implements the interface.
So, if we run this now,
you can see that that works as expected.
Again, executing the two non-private concrete methods.
One through a static reference
and one through an instance of an object
that implements the interface.
So, at this point, I've reviewed everything
about an interface, except the initial intent of it.
So, let's add an abstract method now.
And, remember, all abstract methods are implicitly public.
So, let's add a method now to our interface.
And, you can see the example there,
abstract void theImportantMethod.
This is the public method that would, in theory,
be the method that you'd want all implementing classes
to have in common.
And, obviously, now I need to implement
that particular method in our public class
that implements the interface.
So, what I'm gonna do now is add some code,
add some methods to our class here,
our InterfaceTest class.
Paste that in.
So, the code that I've posted in
includes the implemented overridden method, line 76.
And, you can see that IntelliJ's showing us
that that's an overridden method.
I've also created a method
that takes an InterfaceExample parameter.
And, also, a method that takes an Object parameter
and tests it with instanceof
and casts it to the interface type.
That's this one down here.
So, next, we want to go back to our main method
and paste this on code, so we can actually execute
and test these methods.
You can see what I'm doing there,
adding code to basically execute the methods
using the interface type.
So, let's run this.
You can see, we've got the relevant output
down at the bottom of the screen.
So, let's try another example here now.
So, I'm gonna paste in some more code,
but we have to create a class first
and the class is gonna be called TestGrowth.
So, there's our code.
Now, this code consists of an expandable interface
that declares the expand abstract method.
We've got a Collapsible interface there
and you can see that we're declaring
a collapse abstract method.
We've then got three classes here.
IceCooler, which implements Collapsible.
SuitCase, which implements Expandable.
And, Portfolio, which implements
both Expandable and Collapsible.
And then, down at the bottom, we've
got our TestGrowth class.
At the moment, it doesn't have anything in it.
So, what we're attempting to do here is
to demonstrate that objects that may have little in common
can implement the same interface.
Let's now paste some code into our TestGrowth class,
which consists of the main method,
which we can use to execute some code.
But before I talk about that, we've also added
some test methods down here.
So, we've got a TestExpand there
that defines its parameter type as Expandable
and calls the expand method on the interface.
Next, we've got a TestCollapse method
that defines its parameter type as Collapsible
and it calls the collapse method on the interface.
So, getting back to our main method now,
you can see that I'm creating some objects firstly
and, again, it could probably reasonably argued
that these objects don't have a lot in common.
And then, creating some arrays of interfaces
and processing the array using the interface types.
Note that the calls there
to TestExpand and TestCollapse are both generic
and the objects passed
execute their own versions of expand and collapse
as we'll see when we run it.
So, let's run the code.
And, as you can see, they're clearly running their own code.
So, this video demonstrated that interfaces
give you all the benefits of polymorphism
for objects that implement them,
but keep you free of having to add behaviour
to your business entities
that maybe does not quite fit your model.
Or, they are to facilitate behaviour that's not specific
to your entity's type.
You can declare methods using interface types,
you can cast to interface types, and declare variables
with an interface type, including arrays.
So, moving on, in the next video,
I'm gonna discuss the differences
between abstract classes and interfaces.
See you in the next video.